Okay, great.
I'm Greg Glimming, National Party MP for Maungakiekie.
Okay.
I'm Paul Garcia, National Party MP for New Lynn.
Good to meet you.
You too.
Emily is there?
Oh, Eric. Emily, we have you
and you're...
Yes, sure do. Kia ora. Emily Funnell,
Department of Conservation, and I'm based in Ōtepoti, Dunedin.
Hi. Kia ora. Well, thank you. We're looking forward to hearing you.
We've got your submission, but obviously, it'd be good to hear from you just
broadly. Just how we conduct this committee, we're actually looking for the right
result.
Rather than we try to leave party politics out of it and just make it
a true inquiry into what is the best
result. So
with that-
Here to help
... in that context-
Thank you
... feel free to share-
Great
... about whether you think we should be extending the white bait season or not.
Great.
So I'll just open up with a few comments, recapping our written
submission, and then I'm available to help you with any questions that you might
have. So yes, thank you very much for the opportunity to come and talk to you
today. As you know, the department is responsible for managing New
Zealand's white bait fishery under the 1987 Conservation Act.
Whitebait are an important part of our freshwater ecosystems.
A taonga tamari, highly prized as a delicacy to many New
Zealanders, and are a valuable part of New Zealand's indigenous biodiversity.
Whitebait comprises the young of six freshwater fish species, all of which are
defined as threatened or at risk under the New Zealand Threat
Classification System.
Whitebait face a range of threats and pressures, including adult and
spawning habitat degradation and loss, poor water quality,
impeded fish passage, so the ability to move up and down the
waterways, as well as fishing pressure.
Annual whitebait catches are hugely variable due to a number
of things, including sea conditions, river flows, and other life
cycle factors. Climate change induced natural
disasters also impact spawning sites and therefore catch
numbers, and we've seen that with recent storms recently.
Despite that variability, there's strong evidence that species of the
whitebait fishery catch are under threat.
Action is needed to safeguard the species and the fishery, and fishing is one of
those pressures that we can actually manage.
In 2021, the whitebait fishery regulations were updated to
include a shortened fishing season along with other changes to fishing rules, and
this was the first time that the regulations have been changed since
1994. The changes were to increase protection of the
whitebait species and to ensure a sustainable
fishery. The changes occurred following extensive public
consultation in 2018,
engaging particularly closely with whitebaiters and whitebaiting
associations. And during that engagement, we heard strong support
for improving the management of the whitebait fishery to make it more sustainable.
The shortened fishing season itself saw a reduction from three
and a half months, August 15th to November 30th, to two
months, September 1st to October 30th.
It reduces the fishing pressure on whitebait species by increasing the
opportunity for whitebait to pass safely upstream when they're migrating.
And I think you're aware that the most threatened
species do tend to migrate in that latter part of the season, and that's
why it was that end of the season that we shortened.
Since the regulations have come into force, we've continued to work really
closely with whitebaiters. For example, running a survey in
2025, in November. We plan to do that every
three years to help understand their experience, whitebaiter
demographics, how they're finding the regulations, what motivates
them to whitebait,
as well as just how they're finding it and feedback that they can give to us so
that we can improve the management of the fishery.
There's also opportunities for whitebaiters to get directly involved
in the fishery. For example, taking part in spawning habitat restoration
projects run by local communities, groups, as well as with the
department itself.
With regard to the petition that we're here to talk about today,
as per our submission, we do not consider a season extension is warranted at
this time, but we do welcome continuing work with Southland whitebaiters to
improve the management of the national whitebait fishery.
Kia ora.
Kia ora. Thank you. So, essentially,
broadly,
the
evidence would be that the stocks are going down.
After you, we've got the-- Because we're trying to get the bottom of this, and
we're asking the
companies that buy it, what's your experience?
Yeah.
Is there less bait for sale, repeating.
So overall, are the stocks
diminishing?
So an important point you make there about really understanding the
stocks. We don't do stock fishery management in
the same way marine fisheries do.
But we do know, and as I said in my introductory openings, that we do know that
there's a range of threats that whitebait face,
including all of those that I listed.
Last year, we published a threat status
update, and I will defer to Emily to give you a little bit of update on that
science component there. But yes, all six species of freshwater
fish that are legally defined as whitebait are listed in the threat
classification system as threatened or at risk.
An important point to note, and again, Emily may touch on this too,
this threat status is not based on the number of actual juvenile
fish or a really comprehensive understanding of stock
status. It is based on the amount of spawning in
adult habitat that they occupy, the number of
reproducing adults, and whether the number of reproducing adults
are increasing or decreasing. So there's a little bit of misconception and
misunderstanding. Plus, there was a little bit of a change last year, and
that-Report that was done is not just the department.
There's an independent panel that does that assessment.
But I will defer to Emily, who'll be able to talk specifically on the science.
Is there any science suggested? I was a whitebaiter.
Grew up on the-
Yeah
... west coast.
One of the biggest shoals of whitebait I ever saw was in January,
which was relatively late in the season, but it was in the Buller River, which is a
massive good old-fashioned run, I would say.
No one was catching, of course, then.
So the fact that the season takes place at
an only a portion of the spawning time,
is there any evidence that
certain species come up at a certain time?
Like obviously the key time between 1st
September and 30 October. Does other species
come later and other species come early?
Is there any scientific evidence for that?
Emily.
Yes. I can answer that question. Yeah.
So, there is
evidence that the different species come at different times.
And actually, we've been doing a wee bit of work with whitebaiters themselves
recently looking at eDNA analysis of catches
of whitebait. And this is working with the whitebaiters, and we look
at what catch they've got in their buckets, and we're doing some eDNA
work, because they're really, really hard to tell apart the different species when
you look at whitebait in the bucket.
That's right.
And through the eDNA work, we've actually been able to confirm that some of those
species, at what time through that
seasonal catch when those species are coming in, and yes, they are coming in
later. And this is stuff that's already been found out and known
from earlier research as well from previous people back in the
'90s looking at the catch and identifying the different species in that.
So, the periods of time that the different
species migrate varies across all six of
those species.
The
more rarer species tend to come later in the year, inanga.
The more common species in the catch, they tend to come year round through that
catch.
They do have a peak period, but they also have a long,
protracted period of time that they're coming into freshwater.
And so on a given tide, so you say it's hard to look at a
bucket of whitebait to see which species it is.
But on a given tide, where there's a bit of a run-on, they'll be
likely to be the same species, or could each shoal be potentially a different
species?
It's likely to be a mix of species through-
Sorry, likely to be the-
... a mix of species, yeah. Yeah, they don't come in distinct
species shoals. They come
mixed together within a catch, but they tend to have come
into the rivers at different times of the year.
Okay.
Yeah, I have two questions. One is, you mentioned that the
time where the
fish are the most vulnerable in terms of their disrupting their
natural swarm behavior is the latter part of the season.
Obviously, the request from the petitioner is to extend it at both ends.
But any consideration of giving them some of August back?
Again, I'll defer to Emily, but largely there's no new
evidence.
So we had a really good look at all the available evidence we're still collecting.
There is nothing of significant
difference that would make us think that we would change that.
But Emily, I don't know if you'd add anything to that.
Yeah. I'd just add that the shortened season's designed not
just to avoid those periods of time when the rarer species are coming through,
but to overall reduce the pressure on the species as well in
terms of fishing.
Okay.
Because we do have a lot of inanga coming up earlier in the season, but it
also
just reduces that overall pressure-
Right
... of the activity on them.
Thank you. And then the second question I have is just anticipating the next
petition. I don't know if you guys are going to state that, but the Cascade
Whitebait Company asked for an extension of one day to
include October 31st. Is that something that you'd be amenable
to?
So that's definitely something that a number of whitebaiters have raised with
us.
Mm-hmm.
And that's definitely something we'd be amenable to.
One of the situations that we have is that any
change to dates, in fact, any very basic
operational changes that we would like to make, we're required to do a
formal regulatory review.
That's overseen by Cabinet. So it's quite a-
Process
... a full process.
Yeah.
But we are definitely open to that change. Yeah.
But it could be done by regulation.
Doesn't need to be done by-
That sounds like-
... the next Parliament.
You mean order in council when you say by-
Yeah.
Yes.
A regulatory change.
Yeah.
All right. So one other question.
We've obviously been hearing from Southland and Cascade, I think mostly take
their bait from the coast. What about seasonally?
Does the peak season
presumably is a little different in the North Island and the South Island?
Go, Emily.
Emily?
Yes.
Oh, sorry, I'm looking at you up there.
There you go.
I should look at the camera. Really should.
Yeah. It varies
year to year, river to river, region to region.
Yeah, so it is highly variable. And
you'll definitely hear reports of different timings happening in the North
Island versus the South Island.
But even within the same river, when they start
coming up the river will change each year as well.
So
just, yeah, as Kirsty said earlier in our opening statement, it's very
variable, and we actually can't necessarily predict
when they're going to come in. We sort of have ideas of this
kind of general period of time. But, yeah, it does
tend to be variable depending on what weather conditions are doing, sea conditions,
all of those things.
And so if you were to,
say, ban fishing on a different river,
let's say the Bola River,
the Oreti,
no fishing for two years
in order to perhaps replenish. Could that be done
by regulation or could
you, under current
regulatory systems, identify particular rivers or
would that be done by local bodies or local
climatization?
We do actually have examples of rivers, particularly on the west coast,
that are closed to fishing for that exact purpose.
So that's part of the regulations as well and part of those 2021
changes was the ability to close certain rivers to fishing
so we could add to that list.
I think the process would be still through that regulatory change, though, to add
to it, but I'm not too sure.
So it's quite a process to then say,
"We're going to lengthen the season in
Southland, but not on the coast." And yes, to Whārangi Nua.
Is it a relatively
easy regulatory process to go through that or would it have to be-
It's pretty much the same. So one of the things that we would
like to do if we get given the opportunity to have another look
at the whitebait fishery, there's a range of policy options
available that we could re-look at, and one of those would be
enabling the department to do some operational
changes that the DG can sign out rather than having to do a really
complicated full-on process. Any changes that we would
make to the whitebait fishery regulations, we would obviously do very
much in partnership with whitebaiters and associations and interested people.
But-
So if we-
... does it require a cabinet process.
So if we were to recommend more flexibility
around both timing and closures,
could that be done, again,
from your knowledge, without necessarily a
bill having to be done
through Parliament?
So my-
Or is the regulation sufficient to do that?
My understanding at the moment is the way the legislation's written, we
have to do a formal consultation process because we have looked at trying to be
able to change that season date, and we have to do a
formal statutory process. So-
Every time you want to, say-
Every time we want to make a change. Yeah.
So that's why if we get a little bit more agility in the framework,
in the system,
then we can
be more agile in our fisheries management.
All right. So if we were to recommend that, just theoretically, we haven't had a
discussion yet, but if the committee were to recommend more
flexibility in,
well, it's for
DOC, isn't it? To be able to,
yeah, more flexibility in closures,
dates,
that would be-
Yeah.
Locations.
Yeah. That would be very welcome.
Excellent. Would you like to give us something how
that might look?
We can take that away.
Yeah.
Because as I say, we want to get this,
do what we can. If you can satisfy
the whitebaiters and
yourselves
that by having more flexibility, we could
probably do both here,
if possible. So if you've got any papers on that or anything you could say
how we might recommend the flexibility,
because what we try to do is come up with a solution rather than a
problem.
So part of it, and feel free to jump in, Emily, so we
have had a little bit of a look at it, and part of it is changes within the
Conservation Act. So we did have a look and
think about whether we wrap that into current
reforms, current legislative changes under the Conservation Act, but we've
chosen not to at this time. But that would be the mechanism.
But we can put something in writing to you,
which is more fuller.
Yeah. Well, the work's been done.
Yeah.
So if you can summarize that for us-
Yeah
... it'll be good. And, again, we're looking for the right outcome here.
All right. Sorry, members.
As an old whitebaiter, I'm dominating the conversation here and using my chairman's
prerogative.
Yes.
No. We really thank you for the opportunity.
Yeah.
It's always good to talk about whitebait fishery.
And look, in preparing that paper, just take it as an opportunity.
We
are the Petitions Committee. We can't
click our fingers, but what we can do is hopefully set in motion
and make some recommendations that come from this here room.
That's right. And I think the key here is there's a lot of passionate people that
want a sustainable fishery and want to see the threat
status decline, and we're very much on that journey to work with others to
achieve that.
Until they get to the pub on the night
after a day's whitebait fishing.
And our vision is the same.
When they will say this, "Look, at the moment whitebait, there's no bait, it's
hopeless." But God help anyone that tries to change anything.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
All right. Thanks a lot.
Thank you very much.
Right. We'll cascade this into that. Good.
You're welcome to stay for cascades.
I might stay a bit, yeah.
Yeah.
Great.
You can stay up the front here if you like.
Right.
Have we got Gary Brown?
Can you hear me now?
We can hear you, but we can't see you.
Right. So...
Turn your camera on.
Start. Oh, there. Okay. Wait on.
Ah, there you are.
You see us?
Good.
I've got my wife, Nanette, here with me as well.
I don't know whether you can see her or not, but she's here.
Sorry, who is that?
Nanette, my wife. She's a director of Cascade Whitebait as
well.
All right, thanks. Welcome you both.
Did you hear our introductions before and you're being recorded?
Yes. Yep. Yeah, got that.
All right, so let's hear from you. But make the same...
We're looking for the right outcome here to keep
everyone
happy and to be as we make recommendations back to
Parliament,
so whatever we can do to make things better.
So obviously we've come to you late in the piece because yous want to know what
your experience of the whitebait industry is.
So
let's speak to your... We've got your submission, but I'm sure you've a little bit
more to say than that.
Yeah, okay.
So you obviously read my submission or our submission,
and as I suggested in that, that the,
however the bright spark that come up with the 30th of October,
I'm not sure what they were drinking that night, but,
I
can't believe it's not the 31st of October, so that would be a sensible first
step.
Mm.
So from our point of view,
we don't disagree with the petition from the Southland whitebaiters, but
we just feel that the timing is not quite right.
We think that
given the changes with everyone's gone through, that it needs to
be
basically tested over a full sort of seven to
10 year period,
and then any changes
need to be science-based and backed up with
science. So that's really got to fall on DOC
to prove that they are actually conducting the
science on a regular basis.
The biggest offshore, biggest fear that
we've got really is that their science is based
on the adult population,
and some voluntary
disclosures from whitebaiters. So
probably from a science point of view, the catch histories
maybe are not scientifically strong, if you know what I mean.
You're not suggesting for a minute that whitebaiters don't tell the full truth
about what they've caught, are you, Mr. Brown? Surely not.
Not a chance, but yeah. No.
Well, that's, well, funny enough, well funny, that's exactly
why we wanted to hear from you because-
Yeah
... I mean, at the end of the day,
what propor- I suppose again, we'd be interested to have what proportion of
whitebait is actually sold commercially versus
that what ends up going through the par board into the freezer type
thing.
Well, I mean, that's a bit of a hard one to know, but
if it was, it'd be way less than 50%.
Comes through a commercial-
Yeah
... dealers like yourself.
Yep, yep. That would be our guess. But I mean, that's just
plugging a figure out of the sky. But-
Yeah
... yeah.
And it is dropping. As people
become harder up and they've got camper vans and things on the
side of the rivers, the amount of
legitimate whitebait sold is dropping.
Mm.
There's a lot more... Like we buy off other
fishermen a lot less than what we used to, and it's
not us wanting to buy less, it's
the fact that they're not bringing it to us to buy.
Mm.
They're saying that the cash price is,
they can get more on a cash price than
they can from
us putting the 25% tax on. So
one thing that could happen is if that 25% was
reduced down a bit,
it makes a legal amount that we could
pay for fish caught and go into the legal
framework of New Zealand business.
Then the 25%, they say
we've got to
buy it for $80 so that they get
$50 in the hand. They can sell it for
70 or $75
because we're taking that 25% off them.
Do you understand that?
Yeah. Well, because it used to be that was up to the whitebaiter to pay the tax
and then of course they put it on you guys, didn't it?
Because-
Yeah
... everybody was using a different name every time they walked into-
Yeah. Exactly. Yeah
... sell you the whitebait.
Yeah. And we get hounded by the tax department to have the right name, I mean,
and the right number, so we make them give us
that and they know we're going to do that, so they don't
bring it.
Yeah.
And so the black market, like last year was a big whitebait season, the
black market got flooded.
So
I think there's more than just conservation involved.
There's the whole monetary thing going through the system
of a high-value product not being legit.
Okay. So
where would, I mean, and DOC would probably be interested in this.
I mean, you're saying that a lot of their
science is based around adults and, which are the ones that got through, aren't
they? The adults-
Yes. Yep. Yeah
... that missed the tide-
Yeah
... or that got through the tide.
W- would-
Well, I mean some of the adults,
you know, depending on the species, some of them will last for two or three years.
Some of them last for-10 plus years.
So,
each species is slightly different, but they are the ones that they can catch
during the year and measure
how many there are, and they get their population counts from
that.
But that's-
So-
... my understanding of it.
It'd be very difficult to go through...
So you say it was a good bumper year last year, where?
Yep.
On the west coast or everywhere?
Well, the anecdotal evidence suggests that it was
pretty widespread around the country.
All right. So where would you go
to see to get some sort of
meaningful estimation?
I suppose you just have to go and talk to people who... Yeah, I know.
It's a-
Yeah.
And they're definitely not going to talk to anybody from DOC, are they?
Yeah, no.
We've got our catch records going
back for 60 years.
And over the last 25 years,
we are noticing
on average that the catch is actually rising.
Each season's a bit
different, and it definitely goes in a seven-year
cycle. So we always get a few low ones, and then it builds up again,
then crashes again.
But the average is going just slightly up.
So from our point of view, we believe the fishery
is in a very good state.
But having said that, we appreciate that there's a
lot of habitat that has been destroyed.
But there's some good projects on to
rebuild and provide
habitat as well. So,
that's our take on the
situation.
Well, I'll just give you one final one, and DOC is that,
while the habitat's been destroyed, where you put
drains, where previously was swamp,
is the other side of that that could actually give more breeding space
in the drains that have been dug out than previously existed in the
swamp? That's one
thing, because I know from personal experience in, I know that we
end up, the more the local farm opened up the
swamp with drains, the more bait came up because they're
more easily able to get into the breeding areas.
So there's a counterintuitive there
at play, but then that's
supposition on my part and probably being a bit nostalgic from my old days on the
Waimangarara River. But anyway, look, thank you very much.
That was very useful.
The only other thing that I would suggest to you
guys that,
be very careful about trying to create
different time zones, because that's what happened in the past.
West Coast had a 10-week
season, and the rest of the country was
three months or whatever it was. But that created
an opportunity for some
less than desirable people who would catch whitebait on the West Coast,
drive across to the East Coast and sell it as fresh bait caught on the
East Coast. So
the way it's set up now, everyone's on the same season,
so that's disappeared. So I'd be very
cautious about trying to go turn the clock back
to differential seasons, particularly in the South
Island. The North Island's probably not quite
as critical about having a different time zone or season zone.
But that would be
a point that I'd like to
endorse.
And the use of independent scientists.
We have had a lot of
connection with Mike Hickford, who is now at NIWA, was
at the University of Canterbury. So not
just DOC science coming into the system,
but other freshwater scientists from different
parts of the scientific field all channeling in and
getting opportunity to get money for research.
All right. Look, thank you very much.
Thank you.
We could probably spend the rest of the day on this one, but we've got to keep
moving. So thanks for your time.
Yeah. No worries.
Lovely. Cheers.
Thank you.
Thanks very much.
Thank you very much indeed, Sir.
Yeah. Right. Now we've got Tristan there coming
in.
Have we got her there? Right.
Ah, Tristan, welcome.
Hi.
Now, you've got
your submission here,
and we'll get you to speak to that further-
Sure
... please.
Okay.
My petition focuses on creating a more balanced justice system,
one that maintains strong accountability for serious and repeat offenses,
while also placing emphasis on rehabilitation, early
intervention, and support for victims.
The goal is to not only respond to crime more effectively, but to
address its root cause,
reoffending and ultimately build safer communities.
All right. Thank you. So that's pretty much what-
Yeah
... summing up what you've said in here. Any questions?
Yeah. Kia ora, Tristan. Very nice to meet you. My name is Greg.
What's the context of it? I really appreciated your submission.
What's the context of it? Is this something that you've been working on personally,
or is it a wider research project?
It was a personal project. I've just
always been interested in how the government
and the justice system works. So I was trying to look into it
more, and I found just certain things, for
example, the re-offending rates-
Mm-hmm
... that I found interesting. So that's what started it.
Mm. And can I ask, are you studying at the moment?
At the moment, I am studying part-time. Yeah.
Okay. And is this an area that you're keen to work in?
Yeah. I'm very interested in law in general.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah. So obviously, you've provided a pretty comprehensive
manifesto in terms of addressing
the reoccurring crime, which I think is very
wise to look at that.
If you were to
advocate for one part of your,
I'm going to use that term again, manifesto, what would it be?
It would definitely be the rehabilitation, which
affects the reoffending the most, I think.
Okay.
Yeah.
And in your research in that area, have you come across some
programs that are more effective than others?
I have. Definitely
education and job training
while in prison-
Yeah
... definitely seem to decrease the reoffending rates.
Okay. Thank you very much. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
All right. Any other questions?
No.
All right. Are you planning on doing criminology paper?
I might. I'm still looking through everything.
Yeah. Because this is the basis of the...
There's many papers been written around this very issue.
Yeah.
A myriad of books and papers-
Yeah
... and it's pretty much Criminology 101 that you've
done here. So sounds like you've got an interest in it, and-
It's...
Yeah
... it'd be a great area for it. All right. Look, thank you very much.
Nice to meet you.
Thank you so much for your time.
Thanks for your patience. We got a little bit behind today because-
No problem
... Parliament was late.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Bye.
Right. We're all...
We're off.
Mm.
So we're off, public.
Finished?
Finished talking.
Yes.
All right